Tweets/tweets_blog.md, before:

# Political Tweets 🐦
This project is python-based exploratory data analysis.
*#python #data_cycle #data_science  #emerging-visualization*

## Classroom Highlights 
This exemplar demonstrates: 
1. Basic Data Science Python
2. Python Data Science Libraries (`pandas`, `matplotlib`, `wordcloud`, `collections`)
3. Controversial / Poltical topics
4. Data Decisions and Ethics in Representations
5. Emerging Visualizations

In this project, I address the aesthetic perspective of...

## The Project

In this project, I used a dataset of tweets by various members of Congress, sorted by party (I got the tweets from [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/kapastor/democratvsrepublicantweets)). My goal was to visualize what words politicans used in their tweets, and how those words were different based on the politician's political party. 

First, I used an emerging visualization (a word cloud) to represent the words used by politican's of a particular party. I did this using all words first, then using words which were "unique" to the party. (see the "Data Decisions" part of this post for what I mean by "unique"). This is a great emerging visualization to show students, because it practices proportional thinking and is not difficult to make in Python using the `wordcloud` library. 

Common words used by Democrats:
![Common Words used by Democrats](democrat_words.png)
![Unique Words used by Democrats](democrat_unique.png)

Common words used by Republicans:
![Common Words used by Republicans](republican_words.png)
![Unique Words used by Republicans](republican_unique.png)

I then visualized the words in a more traditional way, a stacked bar chart using Pythons `matplotlib` library. This visualization brings focus to the words which are commonly used by politicans in general, while the previous visualization considered words primarily in the context of political party. 

![Stacked Bar Chart: Words used by US Politicians](words_500common.png)


An interesting adaptation of this project may be to localize the issues by, for example, examining the tweets of more local politicans.

### Python Libraries
An advantage of Data Science in Python is the many libraries available to use. Often, difficult tasks (such as counting word occurances or creating word clouds) can be simplified using a library. When teaching basic Data Science in Python, I always spend a lot of time training my students to look for and use resources. I explicitly teach students what to google (always include the word "Python"!) and what resources are commonly good to use ([docs.python](https://docs.python.org/3/), [stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/), [w3schools](https://www.w3schools.com/), [geeksforgeeks](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/), [github](https://github.com/), and others) We start with using the `random` library at the very beginning of the year, when I answer almost every question with "I don't know, did you look at the [documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/library/random.html)?". While this is often met with eye rolls, it communicates to students the importance of using resources, and the idea that you don't need to know everything to be a good programmer. The best programmers are not those who can create everything on their own or know every command, but rather those who can find resources and make sense of documentation. Professional programmers almost always have a documentation tab and a [stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/) tab open.

### Data Decisions
This project is a great example of the importance of basic decisions in data analysis. Once data is selected, a data analysis is largely apolitical. However, choosing a preparing data involves a lot of important decisions. In this project, for example, I made decisions about
* What tweets to include/how many
* What words to leave out (for example, `RT`, which stands for "retweet" was not included. This may have been an interesting consideration if included)
* What how many common words to leave out ("the" makes sense to exclude, but "he" or "go" or "here" may or may not be meaningful)
* How to define findings (for example, my decision to explore words unique to one party, and how I went about determining what a "unique" word is)


Some of these can result in surprisingly major changes in the visualizations. For example, this bar graph is created excluding no common words:
![word usage including all words](words_0common.png)

and this is created excluding the 500 most common words:
![word usage excluding 500 words](words_500common.png)

One may come to very different conclusions based on the data decision made here. Note, for example, that "house", which could be politically meaningful, is included in the first plot, but not the second.

For another example, these are the most common words in tweets by Republicans (excluding the 500 most common words):
![Common words used by Democrats](democrat_words.png)

And these are the most common "unique" to Republicans excluding the 1000 most common Democratic words:

![Common words used by Democrats and not Used by Republicans (top 1000 Republican Words)](democrat_unique.png)
Again, very different conclusins can be drawn based on a seemingly small data decision. You see the same sorts of changes when looking at the Democrats' words. You can see, for example, that one cloud emphasizes Democrats talking about "Trump", while the other does not.

While there are ways to optimize these decisions, I tend to only have students consider them informally at the k-12 level.

### Controversial Topics
The key to exploratory data analysis is the follow-up (this is especially true with [contraversial topics](add link to post). I believe that it is important to (almost) never limit a students choice in topic. To support this, I encourage students to critically consider their data decisions, and then follow-up their data analysis in a way that makes no claims besides the clear, data-driven patterns.

Commit message:

Aesthetic Perspective
Added an aesthetic perspective of coherence.

Tweets/tweets_blog.md, after:

# Political Tweets 🐦
This project is python-based exploratory data analysis.
*#python #data_cycle #data_science  #emerging-visualization*

## Classroom Highlights 
This exemplar demonstrates: 
1. Basic Data Science Python
2. Python Data Science Libraries (`pandas`, `matplotlib`, `wordcloud`, `collections`)
3. Controversial / Poltical topics
4. Data Decisions and Ethics in Representations
5. Emerging Visualizations

In this project, I address the aesthetic perspective of [coherence](http://www.animatingdemocracy.org/sites/default/files/pictures/AestPersp/pdfs/Aesthetics%20Short%20Take.pdf) by working to make more sense of the goals and ideas of Democrats and Republicans.

## The Project

In this project, I used a dataset of tweets by various members of Congress, sorted by party (I got the tweets from [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/kapastor/democratvsrepublicantweets)). My goal was to visualize what words politicans used in their tweets, and how those words were different based on the politician's political party. 

First, I used an emerging visualization (a word cloud) to represent the words used by politican's of a particular party. I did this using using words which were "unique" to the party (see the "Data Decisions" part of this post for what I mean by "unique"). This is a great emerging visualization to show students, because it practices proportional thinking and is not difficult to make in Python using the `wordcloud` library. 

Common words used by Democrats:
![Unique Words used by Democrats](democrat_unique.png)

Common words used by Republicans:
![Unique Words used by Republicans](republican_unique.png)

I then visualized the words in a more traditional way, a stacked bar chart using Pythons `matplotlib` library. This visualization brings focus to the words which are commonly used by politicans in general, while the previous visualization considered words primarily in the context of political party. 

![Stacked Bar Chart: Words used by US Politicians](words_500common.png)

An interesting adaptation of this project may be to localize the issues by, for example, examining the tweets of more local politicans.

You can see my full report here and my Python code [here](tweets.py).

### Python Libraries
An advantage of Data Science in Python is the many libraries available to use. Often, difficult tasks (such as counting word occurances or creating word clouds) can be simplified using a library. When teaching basic Data Science in Python, I always spend a lot of time training my students to look for and use resources. I explicitly teach students what to google (always include the word "Python"!) and what resources are commonly good to use ([docs.python](https://docs.python.org/3/), [stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/), [w3schools](https://www.w3schools.com/), [geeksforgeeks](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/), [github](https://github.com/), and others) We start with using the `random` library at the very beginning of the year, when I answer almost every question with "I don't know, did you look at the [documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/library/random.html)?". While this is often met with eye rolls, it communicates to students the importance of using resources, and the idea that you don't need to know everything to be a good programmer. The best programmers are not those who can create everything on their own or know every command, but rather those who can find resources and make sense of documentation. Professional programmers almost always have a documentation tab and a [stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/) tab open.

### Data Decisions
This project is a great example of the importance of basic decisions in data analysis. Once data is selected, a data analysis is largely apolitical. However, choosing a preparing data involves a lot of important decisions. In this project, for example, I made decisions about
* What tweets to include/how many
* What words to leave out (for example, `RT`, which stands for "retweet" was not included. This may have been an interesting consideration if included)
* What how many common words to leave out ("the" makes sense to exclude, but "he" or "go" or "here" may or may not be meaningful)
* How to define findings (for example, my decision to explore words unique to one party, and how I went about determining what a "unique" word is)


Some of these can result in surprisingly major changes in the visualizations. For example, this bar graph is created excluding no common words:
![word usage including all words](words_0common.png)

and this is created excluding the 500 most common words:
![word usage excluding 500 words](words_500common.png)

One may come to very different conclusions based on the data decision made here. Note, for example, that "house", which could be politically meaningful, is included in the first plot, but not the second.

For another example, these are the most common words in tweets by Democrats (excluding the 500 most common words):
![Common words used by Democrats](democrat_words.png)

And these are the most common "unique" to Democrats excluding the 1000 most common Republican words:

![Common words used by Democrats and not Used by Republicans (top 1000 Republican Words)](democrat_unique.png)
Again, very different conclusions can be drawn based on a seemingly small data decision. You see the same sorts of changes when looking at the Democrats' words. You can see, for example, that one cloud emphasizes Democrats talking about "Trump", while the other does not.

While there are ways to optimize these decisions, I tend to only have students consider them informally at the k-12 level.

### Controversial Topics
The key to exploratory data analysis is the follow-up (this is especially true with [contraversial topics](add link to post). I believe that it is important to (almost) never limit a students choice in topic. To support this, I encourage students to critically consider their data decisions, and then follow-up their data analysis in a way that makes no claims besides the clear, data-driven patterns.
